---
template: post
title: Bike Jan '18 Day 3
activity:
zoom:
slug: bike-jan-18-day-3
draft: false
date: 2018-07-06T10:20:27.636Z
description: >
  The day dawned fine and clear but somewhat cool. As it was a lot of downhill initially a light fleece was needed. The road follows down the river valley for about 40km to Frasertown, I’m in and out of the morning sun so with the climbs to get around the bends in the winding river I’m running hot and cold. I’m also feeling a bit tired from the hills yesterday and not being able to eat what my body needs.
category: Bike
tags:
  - Biking
---

Big Bush to Gisborne via Tiniroto
Tuesday 9th
Distance: 134km  
Total time: 10.40 Overall average: 12.5km/hr
Moving time: 7.16 Moving average: 18.4km/hr

The day dawned fine and clear but somewhat cool. As it was a lot of downhill initially a light fleece was needed. The road follows down the river valley for about 40km to Frasertown, I’m in and out of the morning sun so with the climbs to get around the bends in the winding river I’m running hot and cold. I’m also feeling a bit tired from the hills yesterday and not being able to eat what my body needs. Traffic is light and so in a couple of hours I’m sitting outside the Frasertown dairy sucking up a ginger beer. A local Maori woman is resting her legs after her morning walk so we chat for a while. Apparently the walk is for her health, the cigarette her comfort.

I have opted to stay clear of the main road to Gisborne instead riding the more inland Tiniroto road. While there is more climbing, culminating with the Gentle Annie there will be way less traffic. As a cyclist, one is very vulnerable to poor driving practices. The worst drivers I have found are the boy racers. They think they own the road and don’t generally change their driving line to give me space. I confess that I have resorted to describing their pedigree after being scared witless. Most truckies give space if I haven’t got off the road already while camper van drivers are usually pretty good as they’re not in a hurry and very friendly when you stop for a yarn.

The day is heating up and I have a long way to go so I get underway. Farmland with river valleys connected by hills. The next 30 km is not too bad as I climb to Tiniroto (260m asl). I’m hoping that the pub is open for a feed and cold drink. I need a rest as well so I’m disappointed to find it shut up. I still have a part loaf of Dutch raisin loaf, a favourite of mine on these trips. It doesn’t get to badly squashed when forced into bags and stays fresh enough in the summer heat. I get the shoes off and have a sleep on their front lawn until disturbed by a German lass who has come out to mow the lawns. I’ve been trained well by my family and don’t wear lycra in public, so said lass doesn’t flee in shock. She is very obliging and fills my water bottles with cold water. My voice is almost gone due to the reflux affecting my vocal cords so we don’t chat for long.

I’m half way to Gisborne and it is getting hot, 30 degrees C I discover later. I pull out of the pub carpark and it’s straight into a climb, 160m in under 2km. I’m feeling it by the top. The next section is hilly, mostly farmland with the occasional pine plantation for variety. The usual lines of poplar trees mark out farm drive ways. I’m glad to be riding this way as I head up the Gentle Annie hill. I stop once in the shade as I ‘hit the wall’ and need a bit of recovery time. The ride down is quick as I lose 200m in a little over a km and I can keep he speed on for some time. It’s not far to Gisborne and I contemplate heading out to the Eastwood Hills arboretum another 14km on, even though I’m feeling pretty shot. I can’t raise them by phone to check on accommodation, so I head into Gisborne. I find the Show Grounds Motor Camp and they have a cabin. Not cheap but I’m not feeling very good at all so justify taking the soft option. The managers take pity on me and give me 6 fresh eggs. The camp is pretty full with seasonal workers from a number of Pacific Islands. Cheery blokes who like fried food. After a shower and gear wash, I bike to a local dairy for supplies. I can’t face much so opt for boiled eggs on bread. A spread my gear out in my cabin and get a good sleep.
