---
template: post
title: Bike Jan '18 Day 6
activity:
zoom:
slug: bike-jan-18-day-6
draft: false
date: 2018-07-06T10:23:27.636Z
description: >
  I have decided to make this my last day. Glenys is going to be staying near The Mount and there is room for me. She has my bike rack and clean clothes and it will be nice to see her again. Because of our people filled lives we have to be intentional to get space, which she is doing. Steve is heading into Ohope this morning, so this time I deal to the pride and accept a lift to the top of the hill above Whakatane.
category: cycling
tags:
  - Biking
---

Friday 12th
Whakatane to Mount Maunganui

**_Distance_**: 91 km | 
**_Total time_**: 5.55 hr | **_Overall average_**: 15.4km/hr | 
**_Moving time_**: 3.56 hr | **_Moving average_**: 23.1 km/hr

I feel rested and somewhat tender in the knees & shoulder regions but the muscles seem fine. Today is all road and busy roads at that. It is a lot better than I thought, they are mostly wide and flat. The trucks that pass me provide a good assisting wind so that I make good time to Matata where I reward myself with a cheese toastie and ginger beer. The hardest slog is through to Te Puke. The scenery is average, the road busy and I’m pushing into the wind. There is a new expressway bypassing Te Puke so the road gets a bit quieter. I know a good café so stop for coffee and a feed. I’m conscious of my dishevelled looks and probably smell, so manage to keep away from the other lunch time punters.

Papamoa has grown from a seaside holiday destination to a busy retirement town. It is pretty much built up all the way down to The Mount. Town riding, what can I say? I’ve punched the wrong road into google maps, so arrive at the address but it’s the wrong place. Glenys’ description doesn’t add up so I retreat to the surf club and recheck the details. My fault, a few more kms to go and I’ve made it!
Reflections on the trip:
I’m disappointed at the distances that I did each day as I hoped to do more. It is a function of my eating problems, so I need to get that area sorted. Small amounts more often.
Take more photos, the country I have passed through is amazing.
The X bike goes well and the kit I take works well in summer.
Don’t get so unfit over winter so that the pre-ride training is easier and I’m fitter when I start.
